## Eui Yul Song, Katherine Lui, Vanessa Hsu, Zoshua Colah

## ABSTRACT

Medicare is a federal health insurance program for people ages 65 and older, younger people with disabilities, and people with end-stage renal diseases. Our team analyzed the Medicare Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) payments for discharges categorized under different Diagnostic Related Groups (DRGs) in order to get a better understanding of where Medicare money is being spent as well as the issues facing those beneficiaries of Medicare. Our research highlights the most common and most expensive inpatient procedures beneficiaries of Medicare are receiving, as well as how Medicare funds are being distributed and how much support these funds are providing beneficiaries.

## INTRODUCTION

The Medicare program of the United States, is a federal insurance program to help mitigate the financial burden healthcare places on people of ages 65 years and older, younger people with disabilities, and people with end-stage renal diseases. Each medicare covered inpatient procedure and service is classified under a DRG (Diagnostic Related Group) Number and Label which is used to help classify Medicare charges. Based on these DRGs, Medicare pays hospitales a flat rate per inpatient hospital care. The reason for creating this system was to reward those hospitals for efficiency. This project explores DRG records for the years 2011 - 2015 and produces different visualizations and insights. 

We have explored the most expensive inpatient procedures in the United States to get a better understanding of how these costs vary by state, year and more. This will provide Medicare beneficiaries with information on the varying costs of certain procedures. It will also give an overview of where much of the money allotted to Medicare is being used and how that amount is changing over the years.


## RELATED WORK

In a research report, Diagnosis Related Groups–Based Payment to Hospitals for Inpatient Stays by the Urban Institute, who conducts research on social and economic policy. Their goal is to expand opportunities for all, reduce hardships among the vulnerable, and strengthen the effectiveness of the public sector. The article lists the strengths and weaknesses of DRGs. Some strengths of DRGs are improved care quality, savings over time, and incentive to reduce costs per stay. With a fixed payment, hospitals have incentive to increase the number of patients hospitalized or hospitals may select low-cost patients which would be profitable. These are weaknesses with using DRGs. The paper outlines design choices to mitigate the weaknesses, such as, continually recalculating the DRG weights. This research analyzes the pros and cons of DRGs and how to mitigate the weakness while increasing performance and positive impact. 

Senior vice president of Cost Report Data Resources, LLC, Thomas Schuhmann writes about the variation in Medicare inpatient payment in his article Understanding variation in Medicare inpatient payment. Specifically, he researched on the variations between states, discovering which states may be at a disadvantage and why. Average Medicare payments varies between states and hospital types. A specific example was “If the patient had been admitted to a 295-bed rural hospital in Paducah, Kentucky, Medicare would have paid $7,525 for the admission. If the patient had been admitted to a 519-bed urban hospital in Louisville, Kentucky, [...] Medicare would have paid $7,719, just 2.6 percent more.” Overall, this article relates closely with our research. We compared between providers, states, DRGs, to analyze the variations between each factor. 

## METHODS

Our project uses data that includes hospital-specific charges for the more than 3,000 U.S. hospitals that receive Medicare Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) payments for discharges, paid under Medicare based on a rate per discharge using the Medicare Severity Diagnosis Related Group (MS-DRG). Dr. Jihjane Li, an independent doctor, provided us with the body systems and medical departments responsible for each MS-DRG. In order to make the data more appropriate and valuable, we wrangled the data by binding the datasets for all the 5 years and joined them to categorized DRG dataset we got from Dr.Jihjane Li utilizing dplyr, readr, and tidyr package. After wrangling our data, we cleaned the data by normalizing the DRG name for each DRG number, because some of the DRGs Numbers had got small updates to their names such as a “+” in place of a “>”. Our data wrangling and cleaning identified that we have Medicare Beneficiaries data for 2011 - 2015 and for 91 DRGs.

In addition to above dataset, we created overview datasets to give a concise overview about the following statistics for each DRG, medical department, and human body system: Total Discharges, Average Medicare Payments, Average Covered Charges, and Average Total Payments. We also created datasets for the top 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100 DRGs for each statistic.
Utilizing plotly, ggplot2, dplyr, and tidyr, we visualized overview of Medicare Beneficiaries for 2011 - 2015.

First visualization was discharge statistics. We arranged the top 10 discharges from our cleaned dataset, created horizontal and vertical bar chart, and plotted the result using plotly. In addition, we plotted United States Map filled by number of total discharges in order to visualize difference among states.

After visualizing discharge statistics, we visualized average covered charge statistics, average total payment statistics, using Plotly horizontal and vertical bar chart, and United States Map. Same methods of visualizing discharge statistics were deployed when plotting those statistics. 

In order to analyze United States’s health providers for the year 2015, we filtered DRG_2011_2015 dataset using tidyr to eliminate unnecessary data for visualization. We plotted dodge chart using plotly to visualize the difference between average total payments and average medicare payments among states. Furthermore, we visualized the cost change for top 100 discharges throughout years.

Lastly, we visualized medical department statistics in order assist our audiences to understand the DRG discharges and Medicare cost statistics. We cleaned the dataset using tidyr and created dodge chart via plotly.

## RESULTS

Within the top 10 providers with the highest average total payments in 2015, Midwestern Region Medical Center and Walnut Hill Medical Center stand out as their average medicare payment is significantly lower than the rest. Upon further research, Midwestern Region Medical Center is primarily a cancer treatment center. Cancer is one of the most expensive conditions to treat, leaving patients with thousands of dollars to be paid from out-of-pocket. “Cancer patients with only Medicare coverage face steep out-of-pocket costs,” “without additional health coverage paid an average of $8,115 a year, “ according to a study done by John Hopkins University. With the other providers, the difference between the total payments and medicare payments is similar. As a cancer treatment hospital, the total charges from the hospital is steep, but the coverage by Medicare is significantly lower, requiring patients to pay out-of-pocket for their treatment. 

In order to get a better understanding of the healthcare procedures people under Medicare were receiving, we looked into the top ten DRGs with the most discharges. From this, we found two DRGs that stood out. The first of these is “major joint replacement or reattachment of lower extremity w/o MCC”. From 2011-2015, this procedure had a total of 2224929 discharges. In doing more research, we found that “hip, knee, and other joint replacement procedures are among the most common elective surgeries in the United States”. This may be due to the increasing rates of obesity in the United States. However, researchers believe that it may also be due to the level of activity older adults strive for these days. The increase in the level of activity among old people puts extra pressure on their joints, causing them to need joint replacements

The second DRG with the most discharges was “septicemia or severe sepsis w/o MV 96+ hours w/ MCC”. Sepsis is a life threatening condition where “chemicals released into the bloodstream to fight the infection trigger inflammatory responses throughout the body”. Sepsis is caused by infections, which are very common. In order to fight off infections, our bodies need strong immune systems. Because older adults generally have weaker immune systems, they are more prone to sepsis.

We felt it would be beneficial for our audience to see the Medicare coverage across different DRGs, so we looked into the average covered charges, average total payments, and average medicare charges. Average covered charges is the provider’s average charge for services under the DRG covered by Medicare. Average total payments is the average amount paid to the provider. This includes the amount Medicare covers, copayments, deductibles, and payments made by third parties. Average Medicare charges is the average amount Medicare pays the provider. This does not include copayments, deductibles, and payments made by third parties. From looking at the data, we saw that there were drastic differences between the average total payments and the average covered charges. Fortunately for Medicare beneficiaries, providers have “an agreement with Medicare to accept Medicare’s payment and the difference is not paid by Medicare or any other entity, including the beneficiary”. When looking at these charges across the top ten DRGs with the most discharges, we found that the gaps between the average total payments and average Medicare charges were quite similar across the board. We also found that “major joint replacement or reattachment of lower extremity w/o MCC”, “septicemia or severe sepsis w/o MV 96+ hours w/ MCC” were the top two most costly of the top ten DRGs with the most discharges, in that order. We found that reasons for why “major joint replacement or reattachment of lower extremity w/o MCC” are so expensive may be due to the long operations, long hospital stays, and materials used for these procedures. A reason for why treating sepsis is so expensive is that sepsis affects multiple organs. When a person has severe sepsis and is going into multiple organ failure, fixing the damage on all of these organs is very expensive.

Next, we broke down each of these cost categories and analyzed the top ten DRGs for each one. In looking at the top ten DRGs with the highest average covered charges, we saw the DRG with the highest average covered charge was “heart transplant or implant of heart assist system w/ MCC”. This also happened to be the DRG with the highest average total payments and medicare payments. Heart transplants and heart assist system implants are incredibly expensive with an average cost of $363284.55. However, if patients under Medicare meet the criteria for these surgeries, Medicare will cover some of these charges. The average Medicare payment and average total payment for this DRG are $85370.33 and $99699.41 respectively. This leaves $14329.08 up to the beneficiary and other sources. This is still a lot of money, but much less than what the beneficiary would have to pay if he/she did not have insurance.

DRGs are broken down in a way that may be difficult for the general public to understand. In order to simplify them as well as take a look at this data through a different lense, we had Dr. Jihjane Li break the DRGs down into different medical departments. We found that the cardiovascular department had the most discharges over the years. As people get older, they often develop hypertension and problems with their heart. All of these issues are taken care of by the cardiovascular department, so it makes sense that this department had the most discharges.

Looking into the cost breakdown for the different medical departments, we found that gastroenterology and hepatology had the highest average covered charges, average total payments, and average medicare charges by a lot. This may be due to the fact that people are going in for surgeries that require a lot of time in the operating room and in the hospital bed for recovery. Procedures like the whipple surgery can take many hours, explaining the high costs.

## DISCUSSION

From our results, we found that Medicare does quite a bit to mitigate the financial burden of healthcare for its beneficiaries. We saw that a DRG like “heart transplant or implant of heart assist system w/ MCC” that had a total covered charge $363284.55, only required beneficiaries to come up with $14329.08, about 0.04% of the total cost. However, this is definitely still very expensive, and many people will have difficulty coming up with the money to pay for it. Over the years, procedures have become more advanced, and many of them have become much less costly for the people who receive them. Perhaps the expensive procedures under these DRGs are what should be researched in order to create less of a financial burden for patients as well as programs like Medicare.

As we explored the top DRGs with the most discharges, we got a better idea of the conditions older adults in the United States are suffering with. These results give us a glimpse into what we can expect in our futures. They also show us what we can do more research on. For example, the fact that so many people are receiving joint replacement surgeries led us to discover that the ages at which people are receiving these surgeries have actually been decreasing. We found that this could be due to rising rates of obesity as well as the level of activity older adults strive for these days. While there are already efforts being made to decrease the rates of obesity, this shows us how obesity can impact our bodies and how much money it could cost us. Because of this, we may want to put more efforts into making people aware of the impacts of certain health conditions as well as actively working to decrease the amount of people with these health conditions. In addition, these DRGs give us some directions for social issues to look into. For the specific case of joint replacements, we immediately see a trade-off. Staying active when moving into old age can have many benefits. However, it can also put extra pressure on your joints, causing you to need joint replacement surgeries. There are plenty of exercises that do less damage to our joints, and these should be promoted among the public to decrease the number of people needing these surgeries.

Similar to  Thomas Schuhmann’s paper on the variation of Medicare inpatient payment system, we looked at various aspects such as location, discharges, and change over time. When looking at changes between states, the yearly change can be about 2 -7%, with the national average change to be 5.1%. A critical message in Schuhmann’s paper, is the need for hospitals to follow Medicare directives closely to ensure the accuracy of data being reported and used for the development of Medicare payment policies. With our insights into the dataset, we hope to provide visualizations to help readers understand the data quickly and easier, to make informed decisions. Based on our results, we discovered similar findings. With coverage between hospitals and states varying, patients face higher costs in some hospitals than others.

## FUTURE WORK

In the future, we hope to do similar analyses with outpatient care data. Many Medicare beneficiaries receive outpatient care - treatment that does not require overnight stays at the hospital. It would be interesting to see how Medicare is being distributed among the conditions that require outpatient care as well as the most common conditions that require outpatient care. It would also be interesting to do a similar analysis with data from private health insurance companies to compare the amount of support public and private insurance provide. We also hope to get a better understanding of the causes behind the costs and prevalence of these DRGs. In doing so, we can be more aware of the social and environmental issues affecting people’s health. This will allow us to make better recommendations for future areas of research as well as policy changes and implementations.

## REFERENCES
Schuhmann T. understanding variation in Medicare in patient payment. (cover story). Hfm (Healthcare Financial Management) [serial online]. October 2010;64(10):61. Available from: MasterFILE Premier, Ipswich, MA. Accessed June 1, 2018.

Scutti, S. (2018, March 06). More men, younger Americans having joint replacement surgery. Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2018/03/06/health/hip-knee-replacement-surgeries-earlier-study/index.html

Sepsis. (2018, January 03). Retrieved from https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/sepsis/symptoms-causes/syc-20351214

https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/04_diagnosis_related_groups-based_payment_to_hospitals_for_inpatient_stays.pdf
